---
title: Time
description: Maybe time is not a point
tags: [emet, todo]
date: 2010-10-02T00:49:50.132Z
---

Maybe time is not a "point' but is a one-dimensional event, because one could say that a 1d point is actually an event. We, from our 3d perspective see it as a point, a location, but to all intents and purposes it could be a full-blown event that we only perceive in a limited scope. Let's call this event "time". We say that something happens in time <em>t</em>, though because we can only imagine/intuit a 1d event, generally out measurement of time <em>t</em> is the interval (or delta $$\bigtriangleup$$) between two events, which we then measure as $$t_1 - t_0$$, the "distance" between the beginning and the end of the event. {molecular orbitals have a similarity to human orbitals}. This event has $$\oslash$$ dimension and thus cannot be measured in any meaningful sense. It just "exists" for a moment, and this is "gone". {It impinges or affects your moment.} This moment "inbetween" is called "space". It is the reality from which everything emerges. It is possible to also give this space a number, 1 and thus a unit of measurement.

Thus in the analysis of the primary cause as tie, it is actually the beginning of creation or existence, but is not he first cause, the alpha and omega, for that is the space from which that point emerges, that which we now call time. For that reason the sages say that creation began with '$$\beth$$', the second letter, and not $$\aleph$$, the first, and though silent, perhaps the most complex of all the letters. For space too is silent, and that <em>t</em> (perhaps we should rather signify it by '$$\beth$$'), has a sound. (Just as '$$\beth$$' is also quite expletive&mdash;the air "explodes" from behind closed lips, and ends, stopped abruptly by the tongue, beginning with the 2nd (i.e. first - in that it "starts" creation) and ends with the last, <span class="hebrew">ת</span>, as <span class="hebrew">בית</span>, with the <em>yod</em> inbetween, where <em>yod</em> = 10, which signifies the completeness, and is one of the names of the Divine, and also is the first letter of the tetragrammatron, <span class="hebrew">יהוה</span>. For anything that disturbs the fabric of nothingness, of perfection will change the very nature of everything. Just as the single dot on the blank canvas will. We call it the reverberations (or harmonics) of the moment, and that introduces the concept of a field, or area of influence. Thus we have realistically our first dimension, which in order for it to "emerge" and manifest, now has another dimension, and is essentially 2d. Our existence begins to manifest in this 2nd dimemension, as it has to have a recognisable "length" (or "breadth").

Just as it says, "a point emerged in the middle", and its "influence" spread out equally in all directions &mdash;i.e. a circle. ($$\circledcirc$$ = sun, cell, atom, space; the most perfect symbol/representation). It would have continued forever until the ray of divine light entered.

This light is what one could call the "consciousness" that joins the two. That is the point becoming aware of its "realm of influence", forming what is termed "the body". This is the beginning of the narrative&mdash;life. For all existence is aware of itself. The mountain, the star Peleidies, even the quanta. It knows it is a mountain. It behaves like a mountain. It's sphere of influence is mountainous, affecting the water, winds, climate, vegetation, etc. It carries its divine imprint, this "light" that is what we "measure"&mdash;from one "point" of light to the next. The distance between, which one could call the minimum distance of (our?) consciousness as the &Aring;ngstr&ouml;m ($$\dot{A}$$) and this is then space. The duration of the sphere of influence of the point is "time". Thus we measure two things:

1. Duration of event
2. Duration of the non-event (quasi-particle, quantum entheogen!)

Together they make up the history, the narrative...
