---
title: Dreams
description: The "real" ones, that we have while we sleep.
tags: null
modified: 2022-01-02T11:07:30.604Z
---

## Dream (2016-03-22)

Woke in pain. Body aching, some molten energy in body, hurting. Did not fight it, rose switched light on. Went into garden and peed.

Then dreamt. In place with others in b&b type place. Gathering or convention. People all around. Had been in room no 3. This was continuation of previous dream which I don't remember, just vaguely, almost like feelings.

Returning to room 3. Had difficulty finding it. Was in mess, but recognized it.

Slept outside in garden on grassy patch. with some companion who was like a Servant or a pupil, or even a presence. Now, in the light of the day, it feels like it might have been lyn, who is tracking me, afraid, all the time.

Wake up to see rats coming onto grass, but they retreat back to bush surrounding patch. Lie down again. Then these black beetles, making a shrill chirping sound appear, and their energy is malevolent, so we leave post-haste I've had enough.

Return to structure, towards my room. Pass by people in building. One says to me nice fire style you have, and points to my head. I glance in the mirror, and see something sticking up like a Mohawk cut in the middle of my forehead. I look more carefully and relies that it is a big black praying mantis type of insect. I brush it off, and it flies off me. I cannot see it. So I go into the large room next to the corridor that leads to the rooms - the corridor is where this happens - and warn everyone about this insect. The next moment this young woman sitting just in the corridor rises and swats this malurgie that was on a pillar/outcrop on in the corridor. She uses her hand and just smacks it, not concerned at all about its derems squishing all over her hand.

I wake up, kind of disturbed and angry, feeling trapped in this situation with lyn in Hogsback. Then I start fantasise about her arriving and being her master... Stand, hands behind back. Tie them. Cane her over beam. Stick my cock deep in her throat. Place her on knees and get her to worship my cock....

Then think of Rachel at party. Want last tango in Paris interaction. Just approach her and offer her one night of sex. No names, no relationship, just night of enjoyment. Let's kiss, and then you decide.

Think of living my life in that masculine mode, instead of the new ages nicer nicely, thinking of the other, being pic, caring about the other, etc, Eric. I am not advocating violation, or rape, or anything like that, but being clear and expressing your needs or wants in the situation, and the if the universe responds positively.... Making it happen.

Blessed are you o Lord, our God, who is the creator and manifest or of all things, good and bad.
